<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="what_is_a_term">
    
    <title>What is a Term?</title>
    
    <!-- Topic-level metadata for searching and filtering -->
    <prolog>
        <author type="creator">Your Name</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2026-02-23"/>
        </critdates>
        <metadata>
            <category>Terminology</category>
            <category>Theory</category>
        </metadata>
    </prolog>

    <conbody>
        <!-- A short description or summary of the concept -->
        <p>Before you can extract terminology from a text, you must first define what qualifies as a "term" within your specific domain. A term is not simply any word; it is a linguistic representation of a specialized concept.</p>
        
        <section id="characteristics">
            <title>Core Characteristics of a Term</title>
            <p>For the purposes of technical translation and extraction, a viable term usually possesses the following traits:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Domain-specific:</b> It has a precise meaning in a specific field (e.g., engineering, software) that may differ from its general use.</li>
                <li><b>Monoreferential:</b> In its specific context, it refers to exactly one concept.</li>
                <li><b>Multi-word or Single-word:</b> It can be a single noun or a complex noun phrase (n-gram).</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <!-- The required Example element from your Content Model rules -->
        <example id="term-example">
            <title>Example: General Vocabulary vs. Term</title>
            <p>Consider the word <i>"String"</i>.</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>General vocabulary (Textile domain):</b> A piece of long, thin material used for tying.</li>
                <li><b>Term (Software domain):</b> A sequence of characters treated as a single data type.</li>
            </ul>
            <p>When extracting terms for software localization, "String" must be captured as a specialized term.</p>
        </example>

        <!-- Conditional text: The Upsell link that only shows in the free HTML version -->
        <note type="tip" deliveryTarget="free-course">
            Want to dive deeper into the linguistic theory behind terminology? 
            <xref href="https://yourwebsite.com/video-course" format="html" scope="external">
                Check out the full Video Masterclass!
            </xref>
        </note>
    </conbody>
    
    <!-- References to standard definitions or external readings -->
    <related-links>
        <link href="https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:1087:ed-2:v1:en" format="html" scope="external">
            <linktext>ISO 1087:2019 - Terminology work and terminology science</linktext>
        </link>
    </related-links>

</concept>