<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="c_why_virtual_environments">
    <title>Why Virtual Environments Matter</title>
    <prolog>
        <author type="creator">Uta Schulz</author>
        <critdates>
            <created date="2026-02-24"/>
        </critdates>
        <metadata>
            <category>setup</category>
            <category>Package Management</category>
        </metadata>
    </prolog>
    <conbody>
        <p>A <b>virtual environment</b> is an isolated container for a specific project. It holds its own Python version and its own set of installed packages, completely separate from everything else on your computer.</p>
        <section id="the-problem">
            <title>The Problem Virtual Environments Solve</title>
            <p>Different projects often require different versions of the same package. Without isolation, installing a package for one project can break another. Virtual environments prevent this conflict by giving each project its own private space.</p>
        </section>
        <section id="analogy">
            <title>Analogy: A Dedicated Toolbox</title>
            <p>Think of a virtual environment as a dedicated toolbox for a single job. The tools inside (packages) are specific to that job and do not interfere with the tools in any other toolbox.</p>
        </section>
        <example id="env-example">
            <title>This Course's Environment</title>
            <p>You will create an environment called <codeph>nlp-course</codeph>. It will contain spaCy and all supporting packages. When you are done with the course, you can delete this environment without affecting any other software on your machine.</p>
        </example>
    </conbody>
</concept>
