<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE concept PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Concept//EN" "concept.dtd">
<concept id="what_is_copilot">
    <title>GitHub Copilot: Machine Translation for Code</title>
    
    <conbody>
        <p>As a translator, you are likely used to CAT tools offering <b>AutoSuggest</b> or populating a segment with <b>Machine Translation (MT)</b>. GitHub Copilot does exactly the same thing, but for programming languages.</p>
        
        <p>It is an AI assistant built directly into VS Code. It is not activated automatically; you must install it and sign in with your GitHub account to use the Free tier.</p>

        <section id="how-it-helps">
            <title>How it works in your editor</title>
            <p>Copilot helps you in two distinct ways:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Ghost Text (AutoSuggest):</b> As you type Python code, Copilot will suggest the rest of the line in faint gray text. If you like the suggestion, you press <uicontrol>Tab</uicontrol> to accept it.</li>
                <li><b>Copilot Chat (Your Dev Support):</b> You can open a chat sidebar in VS Code and ask questions in plain English, such as <i>"How do I run this specific Python file?"</i></li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section id="the-context-rule">
            <title>The Golden Rule: Context is Everything</title>
            <p>Just like an MT engine produces better translations if it has context, Copilot gives better answers if it knows what folder you are working in.</p>
            <p>Because you opened your <filepath>my-learnings</filepath> folder in VS Code, you can use the special command <b>@workspace</b> in the chat. This tells the AI: <i>"Look at all the files in this specific folder before answering my question."</i></p>
        </section>
        
        <example>
            <title>Example Chat Prompt</title>
            <p>Instead of asking: <i>"Why is my code broken?"</i></p>
            <p>Ask: <i>"<b>@workspace</b> I am trying to run the term extraction script, but I am getting a 'pandas not found' error. How do I fix this?"</i></p>
        </example>
    </conbody>
</concept>